# Response Pipelines

One of the core pieces of AlchemREST is the `Alchemrest::Response::Pipeline` class. Pipelines are what we use to take a raw HTTP response and convert it to a `Alchemrest::Result` wrapping a useful object, like an `Alchemrest::Data` class. Pipelines are used in both the main data transformation workflow of AlchemREST, as well as the response capture process.

These pipelines are found on the `Alchemrest::Request` class in the `Alchemrest::Request#response_transformer` method and the `Alchemrest::Request#capture_transformer` method. Each method returns a pipeline that handles converting the raw response into an `Alchemrest::Result` object.

With a bog standard, `Alchemrest::Request` class these methods look as follows

1. `response_transformer` consists of a single step using the class `Alchemrest::Response::Pipeline::WasSuccessful`. This checks the status code of the response and returns an `Alchemrest::Result::Ok` for a successful HTTP response and `Alchemrest::Result::Error` for anything else. The `Ok` result wraps the `Alchemrest::Response` object generated by the request.  
2. `capture_transformer` consists of a pipeline with 2 steps. `Response::Pipeline::ExtractPayload` followed by `Response::Pipeline::Sanitize`. The first step pulls out the body of a response, and the second step strips sensitive information from it using `Alchemrest.filter_parameters
`.

The most common way you end up modifying these pipelines is through the use of the `returns` macro. When you write something like

```ruby
module BankApi
  module Requests
    class GetUser < Alchemrest::Request
      def initialize(id:)
        @id = id
      end

      returns BankApi::Data::User
      endpoint :get, '/api/v1/users/:id' do |url| 
        url.values = { id: @id } 
      end
    end
  end
end
```

What AlchemREST does is override the `response_transformer` and `capture_transformer` methods with 2 new pipelines.

* `response_transformer` becomes a 3 step pipeline consisting of
  * `Alchemrest::Response::Pipeline::WasSuccessful`
  * `Alchemrest::Response::Pipeline::ExtractPayload` - Pulls out the body, or a part of it based on the param `path_to_payload`
  * `BankApi::Data::User::TRANSFORM` - Builds an `BankApi::Data::User` object using the extracted payload

* `capture_transformer` becomes a 3 step pipeline consisting of
  * `Alchemrest::Response::Pipeline::ExtractPayload` - Pulls out the body
  * `Alchemrest::Response::Pipeline::Sanitize`
  * `Alchemrest::Response::Pipeline::Omit` - Drops pieces of the extracted/sanitized body, based on the configuration defined at the `Alchemrest::Data` class level

Now you don't really need to understand these low level details to use AlchemREST generally, but this is a good example of how pipelines allow for flexible response transformations, and may given you some ideas on how to directly customize the pipelines yourself.

## Customizing Pipelines

Just like AlchemREST’s built in tools build custom pipelines for data transformations and validation, you can make your own custom pipelines. First let's talk about how to build a step.

A pipeline step is just a class that inherits from `Alchemrest::Response::Pipeline::Transform`. Your transform class needs to implement a single method `#call`. Call should look something like this

```ruby
def call(input)
  if # some condition that indicates the step succeed 
    data = # some value to pass to the next step
    success(data)
  else 
    error = # Some error explaining what happens, should be an `Alchemrest::Error`
    failure(error) 
  end
end
```

So call either returns a success object, built using the `success` method, or a failure object, built using the `failure` method.

Once you've got your step, then you can use it in a new pipeline. There are two ways to customize pipelines, you can modify an existing pipeline, or build one from scratch. We'll start by looking at how to modify an existing one.

### Modifying Existing Pipelines

Let's start by imagining that we have an endpoint that returns a list of transactions. We've set up a request class and data class as follows.

```ruby
class GetTransactions < Alchemrest::Request
  include ActiveModel::Model
  attr_accessor :account_id, :id, :amount

  returns BankApi::Data::Transaction[]
  endpoint :get, '/api/v1/users/:id/accounts/:account_id/transactions' do |url|
    url.values = { id:, account_id: } 
  end
  enable_response_capture
end

class Transaction < Alchemrest::Data
  schema do |s|
    {
      required: {
        amount_cents: s.money(:cents),
        status: s.enum(%w(completed pending)),
        settled_at: s.time(:iso),
        description: s.string,
        account_id: s.string,
      },
      optional: {
        source: s.one_of(
          check: BankApi::Data::Check,
          card: BankApi::Data::Card,
          ach: BankApi::Data::Ach,
          discriminator: :source_type,
        ),
      },
    }
  end

  configure_response_capture do
    safe :account_id
    omitted :description
  end
end
```

This is nice, but we'd really like to be able to figure out which `user_id` is tied to a transaction. This isn't part of the actual API response, it's only part of the request url. But by customizing our pipeline we can inject it into the data used to build up the `Transaction` class.

That looks like this

```ruby
class GetTransactions < Alchemrest::Request
  include ActiveModel::Model
  attr_accessor :account_id, :id, :amount

  returns BankApi::Data::Transaction[]
  endpoint :get, '/api/v1/users/:id/accounts/:account_id/transactions' do |url|
    url.values = { id:, account_id: }
  end
  enable_response_capture

  def response_transformer
    super.insert_after(
      Alchemrest::Response::Pipeline::ExtractPayload,
      ExtractUserId.new,
    )
  end

  class ExtractUserId < Alchemrest::Response::Pipeline::Transform
    def initialize(request)
      super()
      @request = request
    end

    def call(payload)
      if payload.instance_of(Array) && payload.all? {|item| item.instance_of?(Hash) }
        success(payload.map { |item| item.merge("user_id" => @request.id) })
      else
        failure("Not an array of transaction hashes")
      end
    end
  end
end
```

So you can see how we customize the existing pipeline here. We override `response_transformer` and call it's super method to get the original pipeline. Then we use the `insert_after` method to modify this existing pipeline, inserting our new step after the existing `ExtractPayload` step. Now our new pipeline includes our custom step right before we build the `BankApi::Data::Transaction` records.

In addition to `insert_after` the `Pipeline` class exposes 2 other methods to modify an existing pipeline

* `append` - This simply appends a new step onto the end of the pipeline
* `replace_with` - This takes two arguments, the class of an existing step, and the new step. For example

```ruby
pipeline.replace_with(Omit, Omit.new(Alchemrest::HashPath.build_collection(user: { accounts: { transactions: [:id, :amount] } })))
```

This will find an existing step of type `Omit` and replace it with the second argument. Note this generally assumes each step type only shows up once in a given pipeline.

### Building a new pipeline

Alternatively, you can just build an entire pipeline from scratch. This is as easy as calling `Alchemrest::Response::Pipeline.new` and passing in an array of steps.
